=head1 NAME

PkgClip - Cached Packages Trimmer Utility

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<pkgclip> [I<OPTION>]

=head1 OPTIONS

=over

=item B<-h, --help>

Show a little help text and exit

=item B<-V, --version>

Show version information and exit

=back

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<PkgClip> is a little helper that will scan your pacman cache directories
and help you trim it a bit.

Whenever B<pacman> downloads packages, it saves them in a cache directory,
and never removes them. Over time, this cache can grow a lot.

While pacman does offer options to clean your cache, they are very basic.
Its option B<--clean> (B<-c>) will remove packages that are no longer
installed from the cache (as well as currently unused sync databases. Note that
PkgClip does not touch databases, only packages.), or remove all packages
if you specify it twice.

PkgClip aims at giving you a little more options. To do so, it will
classify all packages into different "groups" (also called "reasons", as in
reason for the recommended action), each group having a recommendation (Keep or
Remove), used as default choice.

You will of course be able to then review it all, and decides which packages
shall be removed, and which shall not.


=head1 REASONS (GROUPS)

For each package, PkgClip will check whether or not it is installed on the system.
The test will determine whether this version of the package is installed, or another
one.

=over

=item B<Treated as if it was installed> - Recommendation: B<Keep>

A package not installed, but treated as if it was. (see B<PREFERENCES> below) 

=item B<More recent than installed version> - Recommendation: B<Keep>

A package of a version more recent than the one currently installed.

=item B<Installed on system> - Recommendation: B<Keep>

A package currently installed.

=item B<Recent older version> - Recommendation: B<Keep>

A package of an older version than the one currently installed. If option
B<Remove older package releases> is enabled, this will not include packages
of the same version but with a different package release number (I<pkgrel>).

=item B<Older version> - Recommendation: B<Remove>

A package of an older version than the one currently installed, and older than
as many packages of older version as specified (see B<PREFERENCES> below) have
been found.

=item B<Previous package release> - Recommendation: B<Remove>

A package of the same version than the one currently installed, but with an older
package release number (I<pkgrel>). Only if option B<Remove older package
releases> is enabled.

=item B<Package not installed on system (any version)> - Recommendation: B<Remove>

A package for which no version is currently installed.

=back


=head1 PREFERENCES

Preferences are available through the menu I<Edit|Preferences> (Note: you can
pop up the menu I<Edit> by right-clicking on the list). When pressing "OK"
they will be automatically applied, then saved to a file B<pkgclip.conf>
located inside a folder B<.config> in your HOME directory.

=over

=item I<Location of pacman.conf>

The directory where your B<pacman.conf> file is located. PkgClip parses this
file in order to use B<libalpm> and access your local database, as well as
determine your cache directories.

=item I<Number of old versions to keep>

How many versions of older than installed to keep. The Nth more recent versions
will be classified as B<Recent older version>, older ones will fall under
B<Older version>.

If you do not want to keep any older version, simply specify 0 (zero).

Note that if option B<Remove older package releases> is enabled, this will
only refer to packages for older versions, not same version number but with an
older package release number.

=item I<Remove older package releases>

When enabled, PkgClip will classify differently packages of older versions, and
packages of the same version as currently installed, but with an older package
release, the later being marked for removal (B<Previous package release>).

All packages have similar names, such as: package-name-1.2.3-4

Here, the version number is 1.2.3, while 4 is the package release (I<pkgrel>).

For example, with packages foobar-1.3-3, foobar-1.3-2 and foobar-1.2-4 and
foobar-1.3-3 being installed, this option will have foobar-1.3-2 marked for
removal while keeping foobar-1.2-4; while without it it would be the other
way around (assuming you keep one older version).

=item I<Do not load packages on start>

By default PkgClip automatically scans your cache directories and loads packages
upon start. Should you not want that to happen, this will help you achieve your
goal.

=item I<Show package information>

When enabled, an additional panel will be displayed at the bottom of the window,
with information about the currently focused package. What is displayed is based
on the template specified below.

=item I<Template>

You can define the template to display package information in the extra panel.
Pango markup language is supported, allowing you to use some formatting (bold,
colors, etc). For a description of the supported syntax, refer to L<http://developer.gnome.org/pango/stable/PangoMarkupFormat.html>

The following variables can be used :

=over

=item - B<$NAME> : Package name

=item - B<$DESC> : Package description

=item - B<$VERSION> : Package version

=item - B<$FILE> : Full path/name of the package file

=item - B<$SIZE> : Size of the package file

=item - B<$RECOMM> : Recommendation (Keep/Remove)

=item - B<$REASON> : Reason for the recommendation

=back

If you leave this field empty and press OK, the default value will be restored.

=item I<Packages to treat as if they were installed>

You can list here packages for which, if no version is currently installed,
PkgClip will treat the most recent version in cache as if it was installed.
Then, all other versions will be treated as usual.

This means that older packages will be kept or not based on settings for old
package releases and number of old versions to keep. However, you can set a
different B<number of old versions to keep> for such packages.

This allows you e.g. to keep the most recent version of a given package, even
if it's not installed. For instance because you only install it every once in
a while to e.g. compile something, and then remove it.

Note that you can easilly add/remove packages to/from the list without the need
to open the Preferences window. Simply select one (or more) package(s), then use
menu I<Edit|Add (Remove) Selection to (from) As Installed List>

=back


=head1 REMOVING PACKAGES

Removing packages is not something you should be able to do as a user, since
all those files belong to root. In order to remove those files (without the
need to be run as root), PkgClip rely on B<PolicyKit>.

When you're ready and want PkgClip to remove all marked (checked) packages,
simply use the menu or the button. After a final confirmation, you should see
your B<PolicyKit> agent show up and ask for your password. Once validated, files
will be removed as expected.

Note that this obviously depends on your configuration. For instance if you
do not have a PolicyKit agent installed/running, PkgClip will simply fail since
you cannot be authentificated.


=head1 CHANGE RECOMMENDATIONS

If you are not pleased with the default recommendations for each reasons/groups,
you can change them.

To do so, you will need to manually edit the configuration file. Note that while
no GUI exists for those options, they will obviously be preserved when PkgClip
saves its preferences.

Also note that the different labels (e.g. option names) will B<NOT> be
updated to reflect any changes you might have done. That is, option B<Remove
older package releases> will continue to be called that, even if you changed
the default recommendation from Remove to Keep (and thus, the option would
really mean B<Keep older package releases>).

To change a recommendation, simply add into your B<pkgclip.conf> one of the
following key, with a value of either B<Keep> or B<Remove>
(e.g. RecommForNewerThanInstalled = Remove)

=over

=item RecommForAsInstalled

=item RecommForNewerThanInstalled

=item RecommForInstalled

=item RecommForOlderVersion

=item RecommForAlreadyOlderVersion

=item RecommForOlderPkgrel

=item RecommForPkgNotInstalled

=back


=head1 BUGS

They're probably crawling somewhere in there... if you happen to catch one (or
more), report it and I'll do my best to squash it.

=head1 REPOSITORY

You can find the latest source code of B<PkgClip> as well as report bugs and/or
feature suggestions on its GitHub repository available at
L<https://github.com/jjk-jacky/pkgclip>

=head1 AUTHORS

=over

=item Olivier Brunel <i.am.jack.mail AT gmail DOT com>

=item Pacman Development Team <pacman-dev AT archlinux DOT org>

=back

=head1 ARTWORK

Icon by Hylke Bons in Discovery Icon Theme, released under CC BY-SA 3.0
